---
id: 20210822
title: "Feature Driven Development With React - Part 1"
date: 2021-07-03T22:14:48.459Z
author: Oren Farhi
templateKey: blog-post
layout: post
permalink: /blog/feature-driven-development-with-react-part-1/
image: ./PXL_20210702_194653498.PORTRAIT.jpg
tags:
  - react
  - hooks
  - redux-toolkit
  - clean-code
  - architecture
---

Over the last 5 years, i've been working intensively with react, redux & redux-toolkit (for the last 2 years). I encountered few interesting architectural and design challenges. Some of these are how to structure a large scale app, deciding whether to use central state management or not, how to make code easier to read and maintain, deciding on a testing tool and a strategy, choose a base UI components library, choose a design system and its implementation and finally - one of the most important aspects in my opinion - find a way to connect it all and still make it scalable for extensions and changes.

Solving these challenges is not easy. Nevertheless, I was able to overcome each challenge - and even more than that - refine the solution and make it better with few iterations.

In this series of articles i'm referring to as - **Feature Driven Development**, i'm sharing my perspective on the aspects I mentioned and how I approach each challenge and solve it.

I believe **Development Experience** is an important aspect of programming and that it is not an easy task. I also believe there are many ways to code something and that "right" and "wrong" solutions are perspectives that change among developers.

I'm trying to share **A** perspective that may be written and designed in other ways as well. My purpose is to share the concept.

I hope this series of articles helps others to find reason and organization when writing and designing code and making a [clean code].

## Articles in this series

1. Feature Driven Development Part 1 (This Page)
1. Feature Driven Development Part 2
1. Feature Driven Development Part 3
1. Feature Driven Development Part 4

## The Context Demo Apps

In this series, i'm referring to one of these apps:

1. [ReadM] - a free app I developed for building confidence in speaking & reading English
2. A Music App - youtube music, spotify or similar

## What A Feature Is

The definition for a **feature** is broad and may vary. I'm referring to a [software feature] - a closed set of certain functional capabilities that usually a user may experience, see or use in an app.

A Music Player app may usually includes many features:

1. A Playlist
1. Player Controls
1. Player
1. Video Player (in case it's youtube music)
1. Playlist Creator
1. Album Viewer
1. Artist Viewer
1. Settings (which may toggle features on/off like - download, sync to devices, offline, history)
1. Search Viewer

By reviewing some of the feature as I perceive when looking on Youtube Music or Spotify, I'm able to name some functional and some presentational capabilities that are available for me when i'm using these apps.

Before rushing into development, a feature must have clear definition of its functionality, requirements and resources it needs to operate correctly within the context of the app. Usually, I like describing a feature with [Cucumber] & [Gherkin] - which helps describing and designing and documenting a feature with a clear and descriptive language (DSL).

A feature may be enhanced, disabled, removed and controlled - this observation is **important** as it will influence the rest of this article series and to the main concept of Feature Driven Development.

## Discussion

I like to discuss design patterns, code conventions and solutions. If you like this article - please share it with others. If you think there are other ways or feel something is not clear - please let me know and I will address it in a followup article or a through comments.

Thanks for reading.

[reuse]: https://orizens.com/blog/react-hooks-and-components-custom-hooks-as-minions-at-your-service/
[previous articles on react hooks]: https://orizens.com/tags/hooks
[clean code]: https://orizens.com/tags/clean-code
[readm]: https://readm.netlify.app
[software feature]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_feature
[gherkin]: https://cucumber.io/docs/gherkin/reference/
[cucumber]: https://cucumber.io/
