---
id: 20200728
title: ""
date: 2020-06-28T15:48:30.402Z
author: Oren Farhi
templateKey: blog-post
layout: post
permalink: /blog//
image: ./2020-06-28.jpg
tags:
  - react
  - hooks
  - redux
  - architecture
  - clean-code
---

## Front End Architecture - The Smart Phone Pattern (OS) & React

Front end architecture is a very important aspect I consider when developing apps. I've been developing front end since around 2007 - and so - since then - i've been interested in software architecture concepts, design patterns and code organization.
Once, in a code review session, I was trying to explain a certain strategy i would have liked the code would be, then a colleague told me -

> Not everyone thinks the same you do. that's hard to understand.

He was right. I was trying to explain what to right and was going through all the necessary parts, but i missed one thing: Showing the big picture.

This article is focusing on an approach i'm taking when designing a feature - only then, i can refer to directory structure and follow what makes sense.

My goal is to share a perspective, show a way of thinking, a Style Guide (if I may), that I follow - while i think it may help others as well.

## The Big Picture

I was once told it's easier if you show us rather than telling us.
There are many good articles recommending about a certain directory structure, where to have what and how to divide the code files into parts.

Smart phones and mobile devices have been around for quite some time now. When i'm coding or start to design a feature, I consider a Smart Phone as the Mental Model for the app.

To simply put, when i need to add a feature, i'm instantly thinking where it would have been belong if it was a smart phone feature that was built into the code operating system.

That's it in a nutshell - that's how I explain the **Smart Phone Pattern (SPP)** - but there's more to it.

## Rules of the Smart Phone Pattern

Lets run through a smart phone characteristics and their counterparts in front end app.

### Device Api

A device may include internal capabilities such as -camera, user, contacts, geolocation, microphone, sound etc..

In code, this may be translated to hooks, component with hooks or utilities.

### Apps

An app in code is a container component.

### Feature In A Smart Phone

In readm, one of the core features is voice recognition. This feature includes hundreds of lines of code and the main purpose is to use it.

In the mental model of Smart Phone Pattern, I consider the voice-recognition feature to be a core feature of the app - where it could be used

[ReadM] is free - please try it out.

[readm]: https://readm.netlify.app
[service worker]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ServiceWorkerRegistration/waiting
[service worker registration]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ServiceWorkerRegistration
[why you would consider adding offline support]: https://create-react-app.dev/docs/making-a-progressive-web-app/#why-opt-in
[store api hook]: https://orizens.com/blog/how-to-not-have-a-mess-with-react-hooks-and-redux/
[redux selector hook]: https://react-redux.js.org/api/hooks#useselector
[toastui]: ./toast.png "Toast for an app update."
