---
id: 20220810
title: "Testing code in Plain English and Enjoy it"
author: Oren Farhi
date: 2022-08-10T15:56:38.693Z
templateKey: blog-post
layout: post
permalink: /blog/
image: ./turtle.jpg
tags:
  - cypress
  - testing
---

Testing is important - writing code without having tests is like filling a lottery ticket - there's a chance you or users will loose something along the way. I believe most developers are writing code and test it out before pushing to production - it's true for most back end and front end developers. However, I believe most developers do not write automated tests - and by not doing that - they are betting.

I'm here to recommend a strategy that works for me (and for others) and one that makes it easy to write tests and by that get a clear vision on what to develop, how to approach it, have edge cases outlines beforehand and making sure you're not shooting your leg when features are added or changed.

## Testing in Plain English
When you're testing a certain user interface scenario, at this point you know what is supposed to happen, what data ise supposed to be there and should happen eventually - so why not document the scenario in plain english?

The reason to document this scenario in plain english is you are able to automate it and run it as a test on your app with every commit (considering you're using git or similiar with a CI environment).

There are few tools that let you write tests in plain english - with the most common one called [Cucumber] - a tool for writing specifications with scenarios in plain English. 

```gherkin
Scenario: Reading A Book
  Given i'm logged in
  When I click a book's cover in the library
  Then I see the first page of that book
```

*Gherkin* is a set of grammar rules that lets you write the above scenario in plain text and make it runnable as an automated test. It's practicaly can lead you to document the features and scenarios of the app you're developing.

The example above is very simple and static - *Gherkin* includes a more advanced syntax for those dynamic or repetative scenarios:

```gherkin
Background: 
  Given i'm logged in

Scenario: Reading A Book
  When I click the book "Phonics for grade A"
  Then I see the first page of that book

Scenario: Creating A Book
  When I click "Create Book"
  Then I see an input with "Title of the book"
```

## Tools of Trade
In order to have these specs runnable as automated tests, we need a tool that can translate these sentences to actual automated actions that acts on a real browser.

My preferred tool nowadays is [Cypress] - the huge ecosystem, api and its extendability makes it a great foundation tool for supporting any customised actions to rely on.


[cucumber]: https://cucumber.io/
[cypress]: https://cypress.io